How-to: Switch from real-time to generic kernel (#147)
canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs: docs/how-to/revert-from-rt-kernel.md

> # How to revert from real-time kernel to generic kernel

Reviewer: File name doesn't make so much sense: change to switch-from-realtime-to-generic-kernel.md ?

Page title match the index.

> Reverting from the real-time kernel to the generic kernel requires manual intervention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Switching from the real-time kernel back to the generic kernel requires manual configuration
```

Author: dbfe4d1

> This guide provides step-by-step instructions for properly disabling the real-time kernel and restoring the system to a generic kernel configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide provides step-by-step instructions for disabling the real-time kernel Pro service and restoring the system to a generic kernel configuration.
```

Author: aaf2a36

> It applies to both **GRUB-based systems** and **Raspberry Pi** devices running Ubuntu Server or Ubuntu Desktop.
> 
> ```{warning}
> This guide does not apply to Ubuntu Core systems
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It applies to both **GRUB-based systems** and **Raspberry Pi** devices running Ubuntu Server or Ubuntu Desktop. For switching the kernel on Ubuntu Core, refer to <the other doc>.
```

Author: > For switching the kernel on Ubuntu Core, refer to <the other doc>.

This document doesn't exist.

Reviewer: That's the one. 
https://documentation.ubuntu.com/real-time/latest/how-to/uc-install-real-time-kernel/

It should be extended to tell the user how to switch back. Please link to it even if that step is missing and you aren't adding it.

(ensure-the-presence-of-other-kernels)=
## Ensure the presence of other kernels

Before removing the real-time kernel, check whether other kernel versions are already installed.

> Search for installed kernels excluding the real-time ones:
> 
> ```{terminal}
>     :input: apt list --installed | grep -v realtime | grep linux-image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List the installed kernels:

```{terminal}
    :input: apt list --installed | grep linux-image
```

Author: Added here: d0b71ed

The same command also gives the necessary results for Rpi, so no tabs are needed here:

```console
~$ apt list linux-image* --installed
Listing... Done
linux-image-6.8.0-1030-raspi/noble-updates,noble-security,now 6.8.0-1030.34 arm64 [installed,automatic]
linux-image-6.8.0-2025-raspi-realtime/noble,now 6.8.0-2025.26 arm64 [installed,automatic]
linux-image-raspi-realtime/noble,now 6.8.0-2025.26 arm64 [installed,automatic]
linux-image-raspi/noble-updates,noble-security,now 6.8.0-1030.34 arm64 [installed,automatic]
```

Reviewer: I still think searching for the linux-generic and linux-raspi packages is better because this is the package being installed later on. But I'll leave it up to you.

    :user: ubuntu
    :host: ubuntu

WARNING: apt does not have a stable CLI interface. Use with caution in scripts.

linux-image-6.11.0-29-generic/noble-updates,noble-security,now 6.11.0-29.29~24.04.1 amd64 [installed,automatic]

> linux-image-generic-hwe-24.04/noble-updates,noble-security,now 6.11.0-29.29~24.04.1 amd64 [installed,automatic]

Reviewer: add real-time ones

```

> In case that other kernels are already installed, as shown in the example above, proceed to [disabling real-time Pro service](#disable-rt-on-pro).
> If the system has no kernels installed other than the real-time ones, you must install a generic kernel first:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case non-realtime kernels are already installed, proceed to [disabling real-time Pro service](#disable-rt-on-pro).
Otherwise, install a generic kernel first:
```

``````{tabs}
`````{group-tab} GRUB system

For GRUB systems, search using `apt` for generic Linux kernels:

```shell

> apt search Complete Generic Linux kernel and headers

Reviewer: Searching by package metadata doesn't seem like a good idea. How about:

```console
$ apt list linux-generic* 
Listing... Done
linux-generic-6.11/noble-updates,noble-security 6.11.0-29.29~24.04.1 amd64
linux-generic-6.14/noble-updates 6.14.0-24.24~24.04.3 amd64
linux-generic-6.8/noble-updates 6.8.0-64.67 amd64
linux-generic-hwe-24.04-edge/noble-updates 6.14.0-24.24~24.04.3 amd64
linux-generic-hwe-24.04/noble-updates 6.14.0-24.24~24.04.3 amd64
linux-generic/noble-updates 6.8.0-64.67 amd64
```

```

> From the list, choose a package whose description is: "Complete Generic Linux kernel and headers"
> 
> Then install the selected one using `apt`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install the required kernel package:
```

```shell
sudo apt install <package-name>
```

`````
`````{group-tab} Raspberry Pi

For Raspberry Pi install the `linux-raspi` package.

> 

Author: c63f72e

```shell
sudo apt install linux-raspi
```

`````
``````

(disable-rt-on-pro)=
## Disable the real-time service on Pro

> Disable the real-time kernel service on Ubuntu Pro using the `pro` command.
> 
> On the "Are you sure?" prompt, type `y`.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disable the `realtime-kernel` Pro service:
```
We don't need to spoon-feeding instructions, especially not for a tool that can evolve independently.

Author: Added e340ae

```{terminal}
   :input: sudo pro disable realtime-kernel
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu

This will remove the boot order preference for the real-time kernel and
disable updates to the real-time kernel.

This will NOT fully remove the kernel from your system.

After this operation is complete you must:
  - Ensure a different kernel is installed and configured to boot
  - Reboot into that kernel
  - Fully remove the realtime kernel packages from your system
      - This might look something like `apt remove linux*realtime`,
        but you must ensure this is correct before running it.

Are you sure? (y/N) y
Removing APT access to Real-time kernel
Updating package lists
```

Check the kernel version using the `uname -r` command:

```{terminal}
    :input: uname -r
    :user: ubuntu
    :host: ubuntu

6.8.1-1024-realtime
```

> If it ends with `-realtime`, it means the system still running with the real-time kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it ends with `-realtime`, it means the system still uses the real-time kernel.
```

Author: Done here: 2959d27

> You must manually remove the corresponding packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must manually remove the real-time kernel package.
```

## Removing the real-time kernel

```{danger}
Before proceeding, ensure that you have [another kernel installed](#ensure-the-presence-of-other-kernels).
The system will become unbootable if the real-time kernel is removed and no other kernels are present.
```

> Once confirmed that another kernel is installed, remove the real-time kernel:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove real-time kernel packages:
```

```shell
sudo apt remove linux*realtime*
```

> All packages matching the wildcard will be selected.
> Review the list and confirm that no unintended packages are being removed.
> If everything looks good, press "Y" to proceed.
> 
> An expected warning may appear during the removal.
> On the warning screen, select `<No>` to avoid aborting the removal, then press {kbd}`Enter`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All packages matching the wildcard will be selected.
Review the list and confirm.
```

> After that, reboot the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, reboot the system. It should start with the generic kernel. 

You may use `uname -r` to verify:
< terminal example >
```

# How to revert from real-time kernel to generic kernel

Reverting from the real-time kernel to the generic kernel requires manual intervention.
This guide provides step-by-step instructions for properly disabling the real-time kernel and restoring the system to a generic kernel configuration.
It applies to both **GRUB-based systems** and **Raspberry Pi** devices.

## Ensure the presence of other kernels

Before removing the real-time kernel, check whether other kernel versions are already installed.
Search for installed kernels excluding the real-time ones:

```{terminal}
    :input: apt list --installed | grep -v realtime | grep linux-image
    :user: ubuntu
    :host: ubuntu

WARNING: apt does not have a stable CLI interface. Use with caution in scripts.

linux-image-6.11.0-29-generic/noble-updates,noble-security,now 6.11.0-29.29~24.04.1 amd64 [installed,automatic]
linux-image-generic-hwe-24.04/noble-updates,noble-security,now 6.11.0-29.29~24.04.1 amd64 [installed,automatic]
```

> In case that other kernels are already installed, as shown in the example above, proceed to the [next step](#disable-rt-on-pro).

Author: Yes, correct, fixed: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/147/commits/8408d3ebb4336ae69a5cb288cc11b172894b8543

If the system has no kernels installed other than the real-time ones, you must install a generic kernel first:

``````{tabs}
`````{group-tab} GRUB system

For grub systems, install the `linux-image-generic` package.

```shell
sudo apt install linux-image-generic
```

````{note}
The previous command will install an older kernel, if you wish to install a newer one, first, search for `linux-image` using `apt-cache` to see the available options:
```shell
apt-cache search linux-image-generic
```

> From the list, choose a package whose description is: "Generic Linux kernel image"

Author: I figure out a possible simplification for Raspberry Pis:

I've just tested using my Rpi4 running Jammy and my Rpi5 running Noble, if the meta pkg `linux-raspi` get installed, the **latest patched version** of the Raspberry kernel gets installed too.

Seems also that there is only one version for the Raspberry Pi kernels on each release (and a bunch of patched versions, e.g. `linux-image-6.8.0-<path-version>-raspi`)

> From the list, choose a package whose description is: "Generic Linux kernel image"

Author: @farshidtz this is always the case for Raspberry.

I've just checked the source package for the newer kernel, on Noble amd64, it is [`linux-signed-hwe-6.11`](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux-signed-hwe-6.11), which means that the newer (**signed**) version 
comes from the HWE program.

The default version of the kernel comes from the linux-signed source:
https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux-signed
(Also, there is this source package which is related as well: https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux-meta)

For Raspberry Pi, the binary pkg comes from the linux-meta-raspi source:
https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux-meta-raspi

And, there is no HWE for Raspberry (I've only found this: https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux-meta-raspi-5.4/5.4.0.1088.85 for Bionic but seems to be abandoned).
